good day I'm Norman Wildberger in this series
we are introducing a proper foundation for
mathematics we're proceeding carefully step by
step one thing at a time and I'm going to move
through the foundations of mathematics creating
proper structures proper framework so that the
subject can be built up with confidence we're
emphasizing clarity we're emphasizing precision
of language we're emphasizing the fact that
we're not going to appeal to Authority we've
got to understand the subject directly we're not
going to take anybody else's word for it today
we are going to look at an aspect of calculus that
emerges when we just study very simple polynomials
calculus is usually thought of as an advanced
subject that you get to at the end of high school
and then developed in the first and second years
of college for non mathematicians calculus has
an aura of complexity and difficulty indeed the
modern treatment of calculus is in fact fraught
with difficulties as I will lay out later on at
this stage here however we are in a position to
introduce some of the very basic ideas of calculus
in a completely elementary and rudimentary
way based on the algebra of Poli numbers or
polynomials that we've developed so far last
time we introduced the derivative and some higher
analogues that it called the sub derivatives we're
going to review that today and then go on to start
proving some important formulas from calculus in
subsequent videos we're going to apply these
to get highly non-trivial interesting results
okay so we are working in the framework
of integral poly numbers a poly number is
really more or less the same thing as a polynomial
except it has a little bit more of an elementary
fundamental aspect a poly number for us is a list
of in this case integers and this poly number
here can be written in this sort of polynomial
form eight minus five alpha plus 4 alpha cubed
minus alpha to the fourth and here this alpha is
a very specific poly number it's the simple poly
number zero one so today we're going to introduce
some calculus ideas applying to these integral
poly numbers we are certainly not going to use any
limits and we're not going to use any real numbers
and we're not even going to work in the framework
of functions we're just going to be talking about
polynomials or poly numbers and the algebra of by
poly numbers so a bi poly number was an extension
of the poly number idea to include two variables
or a two-dimensional aspect so we also introduced
what we call a row poly number which is the same
kind of object except now it's written as a row
instead of as a column and then we had this sort
of alternate notation using beta instead of alpha
to tell us that we're going along a row beta
represents the pilot number is 0-1 as they grow
so by putting alphas and betas together we saw
that we could talk about two-dimensional arrays
they were extensions of poly numbers called
by poly numbers and it's the algebra of these
by poly numbers in which we can introduce notions
of calculus very easily ok without limits without
real numbers essentially working just over the
integers very important point we're going to be
introducing calculus ideas so what we're going to
be doing today really ought to be looked at very
carefully by high school teachers and educators
this approach is very accessible to a year 9 or
year 10 high school student and will clarify and
solidify a lot of their understanding of algebra
it's actually very fundamental kind of stuff so
perhaps some of you viewers will have just joined
us recently I do encourage you ultimately to go
back to the earlier lectures in this series and
to work your way through the subject they may
seem elementary but there's a lot of content
in what we've done so far in particular I'm
going to review something that we've talked
about already Haskell's our rank which has a very
strong connection with calculus ok Pascal's array
was this pattern of natural numbers and it's
sometimes called Pascal's triangle it has the
property that well there's a rows of ones here
a column of ones one two three four five six one
two three four five six along here are the numbers
we call the triangular numbers here the pyramidal
numbers they have the property that at any stage
this one here is the sum of the one above it and
to the left and our indexing generally is
considering this to be column 0 column 1
column 2 Rho 0 Row 1 Row 2 now why is Pascal's
array important because it encodes for us the
binomial theorem which is a rule for expanding
a binomial like this if we have alpha plus beta
to the fifth we multiply that together five times
and expand it all out we're gonna get these terms
here various products of alphas and betas all
degree 5 total with various coefficients and the
coefficients are obtained from the Pascal's array
by reading along one of these diagonals we'll call
this a diagonal of the array so 1 5 10 10 5 1 as
the powers of alpha say decrease and the powers
of beta increase at any one of these entries is
sometimes called a binomial coefficient so this
one here is in the fourth row and the third
column where our indexing starts from zero
it's equal to 35 and the explicit formula for it
is that it's 4 plus 3 factorial divided by the
product of 4 factorial 3 factorial and I remind
you that 4 factorial means 1 times 2 times 3
times 4 all right so that's a review of Pascal's
or a binomial theorem very important fundamental
aspect of algebra ok so let's go back down to a
poly number here's a poly number or if you prefer
polynomial 8 minus 5 alpha plus 4 alpha cubed
minus alpha to the fourth so the starting point
is to look at this and say we're going to think
about this as giving us a buy poly number which
we call the tailor by poly number and what it is
called T of P is just the polynomial evaluated at
alpha plus beta so we're moving from one variable
to two variables we're going to replace each of
these alphas with alpha plus beta so we get eight
minus five alpha plus beta plus 4 alpha plus beta
cubed minus alpha plus beta to the fourth now this
has an interpretation as being a translate of the
original poly number by beta if you like and when
we expand this all out and collect terms obviously
we're going to have to use the binomial theorem
because we have things like alpha plus beta cubed
and alpha plus beta to the fourth and if you did
the exercise from the previous lecture which I
hope you have you will probably have figured out
that when you're expanding something like this
out it's very directly connected with Pascal's
array because what we're doing is we're scaling
the diagonals of Pascal's array why is that well
alpha plus beta that sort of corresponds to this
diagonal right there alpha plus beta cubed
corresponds to this diagonal right here and
since there's a coefficient of four there we're
really going to want to multiply each of these
coefficients by four alpha plus beta to the fourth
will correspond to this diagonal right here we'd
have to multiply each of those terms by minus one
so intimate connection between the Taylor by poly
number of a poly number and scaling the Pascal's
array in a sense of multiplying the diagonals of
this array by the coefficients of the polynomial
or by poly number and this taylor by poly number
carries inside it all the information about the
derivatives and sub derivatives of the poly number
so it's a very important object very simple but
very important object associated to a polynomial
so let's have a look at that specific example and
what does the Taylor by Pauli number really look
like so the poly number is 8 minus 5 0 4 minus
1 and here is the taylor by poly number it's
obtained by taking Pascal's array and multiplying
each of the diagonals by the corresponding
coefficient of the original Pauline umber so this
top left entry is multiplied by 8 then this next
entry which corresponds to alpha plus beta is
multiplied by minus 5 the next entry which is
alpha plus beta squared corresponds to coefficient
of 0 then alpha plus beta cubed got a coefficient
of 4 so we have to multiply each of those
coefficients by 4 and then alpha plus beta to the
fourth had a coefficient of minus 1 so each one of
these numbers is multiplied by minus 1 and there
were no higher powers of alpha in the poly number
so the rest of the Pascal's array which in fact
goes on indefinitely is killed because they're all
if you like multiplied by 0 all those subsequent
diagonals so this is the taylor by poly number and
if we write it out in alpha beta form then each of
these coefficients gets associated to it a power
of alpha and beta the beta power is increasing in
this direction and the alpha power is increasing
in this direction starting from zero in both
directions so let's make sure we understand that
so here is the thing written out and I've written
it out in kind of diagonal triangular form to
mimic what's going on here so 8 minus 5 beta
plus 0 beta squared plus 4 beta cubed minus beta
to the fourth then the next row has power of alpha
everywhere so it's minus 5 alpha 0 alpha beta
12 alpha beta squared minus 4 alpha beta cubed
the next one has alpha Squared's the next one is
alpha cubed and then alpha to the fourth well we
can write that out in a number of different ways
and one very nice way is to group together all the
powers of beta with various coefficients which
are poly numbers in alpha so when we do that
here are all the terms with no betas here are all
the terms with a single beta and then with a beta
squared I beta cubed and a beta to the fourth so
I've just rearranged the terms that you find here
in a line and this then is the definition of the
very is sub derivatives of the poly number P by
definition this is D Sub Zero of P this is D sub
one of P this is D sub 2 of P this is D sub 3 of
P and this minus 1 here would be D sub 4 of P
these are the sub derivatives of P the zeroth
one the D Sub Zero of P is just P itself so P is
replicated right there the first one not that's
the zeroth one that's the first one the first
one there which we're calling D sub 1 of P is
sometimes just written D of P for short and that
has a special name that's called the derivative
of P so there is P there there's the derivative
of P which we also call the first sub derivative
there's the second sub derivative the third sub
derivative the fourth sub derivative is minus
1 and v sub derivative and all higher ones are 0
okay so it's a very concrete explicit way we start
with the polynomial P we calculate P of alpha plus
beta we write it out hopefully in the Pascal kind
of form to make it very simple to understand we're
just taking Pascal's array multiplying the various
diagonals by the coefficients and then we read
off the columns are the various sub derivatives
of the original Pauline umber so the connection
between the original Pauline umber and its sub
derivatives is just the connection that we get
when we multiplying Pascal's array along diagonals
by the coefficients of the polynomials one column
at a time so if you have taken a calculus course
before I hope you appreciate how different this
is as an introduction to the derivatives and the
higher derivatives to what you usually do this is
a completely different story it seems however the
result is effectively the same so way of thinking
provides a very interesting alternative to explain
in calculus to high school students almost to
primary school students it's so elementary in
fact but let's not push it a very good alternative
so just making sure let's connect it now with a
very familiar formula that you'll all have seen
if you have taken a calculus course namely what
does the derivative of a polynomial look like
explicitly we'll give that a name we'll call it
the derivative theorem and we're gonna work with a
general polynomial here not a specific one that's
also instructive somehow the pattern is easier to
see so we're starting with a polynomial P which is
a 0 plus a 1 alpha plus a 2 alpha squared all the
way up to a sub n alpha to the N or all the terms
increasing powers of alpha up to alpha to the
N then the claim is that the derivative of this
polynomial the first sub derivative which is the
same as the derivative is equal to this polynomial
and that's a one that was same one there plus 2
a 2 alpha plus 3 a 3 alpha squared and so on up
to n a sub n alpha to the n minus 1 and you can
see the pattern most clearly if we just look at
the nth term here what's happened to the ends
term well the exponent and here comes down and
is now multiplying the coefficient that was there
instead of having a sub n as a coefficient we now
have n times a sub N and also that power is
decreased by 1 and the same pattern holds for
all the other terms for example this one here the
two came down multiplied by a 2 and now we have
just alpha to the 1 here the 1 power came down
1 times a 1 and to the 0 is just 1 and this one
here is a little bit special it got completely
killed it's no longer around all right so let's
just explain why is this true um it should almost
be kind of obvious from what we've been talking
about with the pascal's array but let's have a
good look so the main object is this taylor by
poly number we're looking at T of P which is P of
alpha plus beta by definition that's D Sub Zero
of P plus D sub 1 of P times beta plus T sub 2 of
P times beta squared and so on we're really only
interested in this linear term here because that's
the first sub derivative or the derivative that's
what we're claiming is equal to this so we have
to have a look at this and then we have to look
at the terms which appear linearly in beta so
here's the Taylor by poly number it's a 0 plus
a 1 times alpha plus beta plus a 2 times alpha
plus beta squared and so on all the way up to a
n times alpha plus beta to the ends now we have
to multiply all of that out and we have to look
at what is the coefficient of beta so well first
of all the constants the things that don't involve
any beta are a 0 a 1 alpha a 2 alpha squared all
the way up to a n alpha to the N the things that
do involve a beta are right here in this term here
so we have to go through where do we get betas
from all these powers the first beta that we get
is from here we get a 1 times beta so there's an
a1 there the next beta is obtained from this term
and you have to know the binomial theorem here we
get a beta when we multiply this out there's a
2 alpha beta here multiplied by a 2 so it'll be
2 times a2 times alpha times of course beta which
we've pulled to the outside the next term will be
a three alpha plus beta cubed and when you expand
that out with the binomial theorem and say what's
the coefficient of beta it will be three alpha
squared and then we have to multiply it by the
existing coefficient a three all the way up to
this one here we look at this and ask what's
the coefficient of beta well that's the term
that has alpha to the n minus one times beta
and that coefficient will be multiplied with an N
from the binomial theorem a single n or n choose
one if you like and then that n choose 1 gets
multiplied by a sub n and that's the term that
we're getting there and that there is exactly
what we're claiming is the derivative so we're
comparing coefficients here the coefficient of
beta is the derivative so that's the derivative
right there and this is a person important skill
for all calculus students is to be able to take
the derivative of a polynomial so if here's a
polynomial 7-4 alpha plus 8 alpha squared minus
3 alpha to the fifth so we have to remember that
the constant term disappears so the 7 vanishes
minus four alpha minus four eight alpha squared
the two times eight is 16 times alpha minus 3
alpha to the fifth 5 times 3 is minus 15 and then
alpha to the fourth so all the same pattern over
an hour the power gets multiplied by the existing
coefficient and then the new exponent is one less
than the previous go through term by term that's
how you calculate the derivative of the polynomial
it might be useful to remind you of our notation
for binomial coefficients so in Pascal's array
the binomial coefficient n choose K which is
n factorial over K factorial times n minus K
factorial that's called a binomial coefficient
and that's the formula for the entries of this
table and specifically here is the Pascal's
array with numbers and here it is with sort
of the binomial coefficients so along a diagonal
say they're the top entries all three so here's
3 2 0 3 2 s 1 3 choose 2 and 3 choose 3 those
are the 4 coefficients involved in alpha plus
beta cubed okay so in parallel to the derivative
theorem that we just wrote down here is a second
sub derivative theorem which tells you how to find
the second sub derivative of a general polynomial
so we're starting with the same polynomial
P as before and the claim is that the second
sub derivative D sub 2 of P is this expression
the first entry is a sub 2 so now the first two
terms have disappeared and now we just have an
a2 here with no power of alpha and then the next
one is 3 times a sub 3 times alpha and the next
one 6a sub 4 times alpha squared and so on till
the last one associated to this is n choose 2 the
exponent choose 2 times a sub n times alpha to the
N minus 2 so the various multipliers that we're
using here to multiply the existing coefficients
are coming from this second column of Pascal's
array which we recognize as being the triangular
numbers that we've talked about previously the
triangular numbers are appearing here as the the
numbers that we multiply the existing coefficients
with to go from the poly number to its second sub
derivative the other thing to note is that
the powers of alpha are decreasing by 2 at
every stage so from here alpha squared - alpha
0 from alpha cubed here - for two the one from
alpha to the N to alpha to the N minus 2 with the
derivative they were decreasing by one with the
second sub derivative they're decreasing by two
corresponding to the fact that we're going over
to in the Pascal's array so the proof follows
very much the proof of the previous theorem we
have a look at the tailor by poly number P of
alpha plus beta there's its definition just as
before and there's what it amounts to for the
polynomial that we're looking at our job is
to find the coefficient of beta squared in here
so we have to look through these terms and find
out where are we getting a beta squared so how do
we get such beta Squared's there will be no beta
squared here or here but this term will give us a
beta squared times an a sub 2 and I write 2 choose
2 because there's really a binomial theorem a very
simple one being applied here to alpha plus beta
squared coefficient of beta squared can be thought
of as 2 choose 2 in this term here the coefficient
of beta squared will involve 3 choose 2 there will
also be an alpha term because the total degree has
to be 3 and the ace of 3 which is already there
similarly the next term there'll be an ace of 4
the coefficient of beta squared will be 4 choose
2 times alpha squared all the way up to the last
term here the coefficient of beta squared will be
a sub N and choose 2 times alpha to the N minus 2
and these numbers here are just the numbers
appearing down that second column of the Pascoe's
array the triangular numbers 1 3 6 and so on up
to n choose 2 so that's the proof of that second
sub derivative theorem here's an example as a
polynomial P suppose we want to find its second
sub derivative then we go through each of these
terms we take one like this for example the 3 is
lowered to a 1 and we have to multiply by 3 choose
2 which is 3 here we have to multiply by 4 choose
2 which is 6 here we have to multiply by 20 choose
2 which turns out to be 190 so that's how we take
the second sub derivative of the polynomial it's
a very good exercise to compare that to what you
would get if you took the second derivative which
means take the derivative of P once and then take
the derivative again you know there was the
derivative of the derivative you'll see that
you don't quite get this you get a multiple of
this so the derivative of the derivative is more
complicated because it has an extra factor all
the coefficients will be bigger than they really
need to be the important information is contained
in the second sub derivative the extra complexity
of the second derivative is most of the time
completely unnecessary just extra baggage that
students have to carry around and the same
remarks work for the third sub derivative
and higher sub derivatives as well these are more
fundamental more natural quantities than are the
higher derivatives and now we'd like to establish
two basic computational rules for derivatives and
sub derivatives that tell us first of all how
to calculate sub derivatives for a sum of two
polynomials and then secondly how you compute the
sub derivatives of a product of two polynomials
or poly numbers addition is easier so here's the
addition rule for sub derivatives it's very very
simple it's about as simple as it could be
says that the K sub derivative of P plus Q
is just the case a derivative of P plus the K sub
derivative of Q well it's almost obvious but let
me write it out anyway just to show you how these
things can go so the crucial object is the taylor
by poly number the quantity T of P plus Q which
is P plus Q of alpha plus beta so if P and Q are
polynomials then P plus Q of alpha plus beta
will be P of alpha plus beta plus Q of alpha
plus beta so those are the individual Taylor by
Polly numbers for P and Q so the information is
already contained in this equation here because
these Taylor by Polly numbers they encode all the
sub derivatives they're all the sub derivatives
of P plus Q there are all the sub derivatives
of P there are all the sub derivatives of Q
and the statement that this thing is equal
to this Plus this just means that this equals
this Plus this this equals this Plus this and
so on all the way through so for any K the K sub
derivative of P plus Q will be the sum of the K
sub derivative of P plus the K sub derivative of Q
the multiplication rule that tells us how to find
the sub derivative of a product of polynomials
they're important rule is more complicated but
it's still pretty familiar I hope here it is right
here saying that the caithe sub derivative of the
product P times Q here's a psalm of terms d zero
of P times DK of Q plus D 1 of P times DK minus
1 of Q all the way up to DK of P times D 0 of Q so
in all these products the coefficients add up to K
we look at the Taylor polynomial for P times Q
there it is there P times Q of alpha plus beta
well that's going to be P of alpha plus beta
times Q of alpha plus beta in other words the
Taylor polynomial for Q so this equality
here is the crucial one that connects the
sub derivatives there is T of P times Q the
various sub derivatives of P times Q here is
T of P just the sub derivatives of P and here
sub derivatives of Q and we're told that this
is equal to this times this now you should think
about this as being essentially a poly number in
beta equals the product of this poly number times
this poly number so the theorem results by looking
at the coefficients of beta to the K in both
expressions the coefficient of beta to the K
up here will be what we want D sub K of P of Q
and how do we get powers of beta to the K from
this product well by doing the product this one
times the beta to the K this one times the beta
to the K minus 1 this 1 times the beta to the
k minus 2 down here and so on so we're taking
d sub P heat from here and D sub K of Q from
the bottom now we're adding D sub 1 from here
and D sub K minus 1 from the bottom all the way
up till we get to the cave 1 on the top and the
zeroth one on the bottom so it's just the way
we multiply polynomials you could think about
it as being the expression or embodiment of
this relation between the Taylor polynomial
in calculus very special case still also
important on its own the case when K equals
one just a simple derivative of the product P
times Q then there will be only two terms just
this times this Plus this times this coefficients
of beta so we get P times D of Q Plus D of P times
Q so the derivative of a product is one times
the derivative of the other plus the derivative
of the first times the other so pretty famous
formula for a derivative and finally here is a
step up from that first derivative formula here's
the formula for the second sub derivative of a
product D sub two of P times Q is P times D sub
two of Q plus D one of P times D one of Q plus D
2 of P times Q and it's easy enough to write down
explicitly the formula for D sub 3 and so on ok
here's a system exercises for you to practice
thing sub derivatives and making sure that you
understand how these addition and multiplication
rules work the additional rule of course is very
simple but still we want to have some practice
calculating sub derivatives and verifying the
various corollaries and I suggest that you have
a go with not just these ones but you can make
up your own polynomials take derivatives take
products take derivatives of products and so on
now that we have these tools of hand we are in
a position to do some interesting things next
time we're going to apply this very elementary
approach to calculus talking about tangent lines
and in fact tangent conics to polynomials or
poly numbers this will still be done in a very
algebraic framework and we'll see that we're
going to get some surprising results perhaps
some lovely theorems that even if you've been
teaching calculus for many years may be new
to you so I hope you'll join me for that
I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening